README.md, before:

# Ansible deployment orchestration and configuration management

[![Build
Status](https://travis-ci.org/dimagi/commcarehq-ansible.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/dimagi/commcarehq-ansible)

This repository represents a workable role for deploying a single new
"webworker" to a given stack for the commcare-hq application.

To test the role, a vagrant file has been added that will provide the required
servers for a multi-machine deployment similar to the US production stack
described in
[Dimagi devops needs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tQFDC56SU8N1M-1abDWpnQKti2zYroTPBC2EmeIM8SA/pub)

Begin by checkout out the source for this repostiory:

```
$ git clone https://github.com/dimagi/commcarehq-ansible
```

Then install the git hooks:

```
./git-hooks/install.sh
```

Now you can change directories into the new clone and set up submodules:

```
$ cd commcarehq-ansible
$ git submodule init
$ git submodule update
```

Ensure you have downloaded Vagrant and virtual box
If you needed to download virtual box, you should also download a box configuration:
```
vagrant box add precise64 http://files.vagrantup.com/precise64.box
```

### Mutli-machine cluster setup

Then start vagrant:

```
$ vagrant up
```

If you run into issues starting vagrant, see the troubleshooting section at the bottom.

The `./reset-vms` command can be run at any time, possibly with a subset of the
VM names, to reset the VMs to their initial state and provision them with your
SSH key. Run `./reset-vms` without arguments for usage info.

Once this is done, you may ssh into the control server and run a full deployment:

```
$ vagrant ssh control
...
$ ansible-playbook -i inventories/development -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml' deploy_stack.yml
```

This will build a database server, a proxy server and a single web worker,
hooked into both appropriately.

Once the preliminary deployment is complete, a new web worker may be added
simply by editing the file `ansible/inventories/development` and adding the second
web worker server IP address. Also uncomment the section of the vagrant file that refers to 'app2':

```ini
[webworkers]
192.168.33.15
192.168.33.18
```

### Monolith setup

Sometimes multi machine setup locally can be very large. In order to setup a monolith, which is just one machine, you can use this setup:
```
cp Vagrantfile-monolith Vagrantfile
vagrant up
```
The one other change needed is to point to the proper inventory. Instead of using `ansible/inventories/development`, use `ansible/inventories/monolith`:

```
$ vagrant ssh control
...
$ ansible-playbook -i inventories/monolith -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml' deploy_stack.yml
```

### Email setup

In order to have this set up send email without crashing
(which you need to do during a deploy, for example)
run a debug smtp server daemon on control:

```bash
$ vagrant ssh control
...
$ python -m smtpd -n -c DebuggingServer 0.0.0.0:1025
```

### Troubleshooting

`vagrant up` fails.
* Start VirtualBox `$ VirtualBox`
  * Or on a Mac, `$ sudo /Library/StartupItems/VirtualBox/VirtualBox restart`
* Attempt to start the VM
  * If the error message is: `VT-x needs to be enabled in BIOS`
For the Lenovo T440s: 
  * Restart machine, press Enter during startup
  * Navigate to Security -> Virtualization
    * Turn both settings on


### Running only parts of the playbook

- Update localsettings:
  ```bash
  ansible-playbook -i inventories/development -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml'  deploy_stack.yml --tags=localsettings
  ```
- Skip the common setup, including apt installs and updating the commcarehq code:
  ```bash
  ansible-playbook -i inventories/development -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml'  deploy_stack.yml --skip-tags=common
  ```

Tags available:

- apache2
- aptcache
- common
- deploy
- git
- keystore
- ksplice
- localsettings
- newrelic
- slow

Note: to generate this list automatically, you can run something like

```bash
ansible-playbook -u root -i ../../commcare-hq/fab/inventory/india deploy_stack.yml -e "@../config/india/india.yml" --tags= | sed 's/ERROR: tag(s) not found in playbook: .  possible values: //g' | sed 's/,/\
/g' | xargs -I% echo - %
```


### Setting up ansible control machine

```bash
ansible-playbook -u root -i inventories/localhost deploy_control.yml -e "@../config/$ENV/$ENV.yml" --ask-sudo-pass
```

### Use your ssh key to authenticate

Ansible forwards SSH requests through your local machine to authenticate with
remote servers.  This way authentication originates from your machine and your
credentials, and the ansible machine doesn't need its own auth to communicate
with other servers managed with ansible.

SSH `ForwardAgent` can be enabled by passing the `-A` flag on the command line:
```bash
$ ssh -A control.internal-va.commcarehq.org
```

You can also enable it automatically for an alias in your ssh config (note that
you then must use the alias `$ ssh control` for the settings to take effect)
```
# ~/.ssh/config
Host control
    Hostname control.internal-va.commcarehq.org
    ForwardAgent yes
```

Be careful not to enable `ForwardAgent` for untrusted hosts.

You cannot use ssh forwarding with `mosh`, so you cannot use mosh for ansible.

[troubleshooting](https://developer.github.com/guides/using-ssh-agent-forwarding/)

### Setting up a dev account on ansible control machine

You must ssh in as your dev user, with SSH `ForwardAgent` enabled (see above).

```bash
git clone git@github.com:dimagi/commcarehq-ansible
. commcarehq-ansible/control/init.sh
update-code

# optional: make subsequent logins a bit more convenient
echo '[ -t 1 ] && source ~/init-ansible' >> ~/.profile
```

On subsequent logins if optional step was not done.

```bash
. init-ansible
```

Setup the vault password files as described below in [Managing secrets with Vault](#managing-secrets-with-vault)


### Simulate dev user setup on vagrant control machine
Add a record for your user to `dev_users.present` in `ansible/vars/dev/dev_public.yml` and your SSH public key to
`ansible/vars/dev/users/{username}.pub`.

Login with `vagrant ssh control`

```bash
ansible-playbook -u root -i inventories/development deploy_control.yml -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml' --diff
```

Login as your user: `vagrant ssh control -- -l $USER -A

```bash
ln -s /vagrant ~/commcarehq-ansible
. commcarehq-ansible/control/init.sh
echo '[ -t 1 ] && source ~/init-ansible' >> ~/.profile

# run ansible
ansible-playbook -u ansible --ask-sudo-pass -i inventories/development \
  -e @vars/dev.yml --diff deploy_stack.yml --tags=users,ssh # or whatever
```

### Managing secrets with Vault
**IMPORTANT**: Install the git hooks to help ensure you never commit secrets into the repo: `./git-hooks/install.sh`

All the secret variables and private data required for the different environments is included
in this repository as encrypted files (`*_vault.*`).

To edit these files you need to either have the vault keys setup on your machine or be able 
to provide them on the command line when prompted.

To set up the key files create one file for each environment as shown below. Each file should contain
just the Vault password for that environment on a single line (keys stored in CommCare Keepass):

```
vi ~/.vault_pass_{ENV}.txt  # paste in the key
chmod 600 ~/.vault_pass_*
```

#### Viewing / Editing encrypted files
You can use Vault's built in editing capability as follows:

```
ENV=production ansible-vault edit ansible/vars/$ENV/${ENV}_vault.yml --vault-password-file=~/.vault_pass_${ENV}.txt
```

This will decrypt the file for editing and re-encrypt it after. Note that even if no changes
are made to the file the encrypted contents will have changed.

If you just want to view the contents of the file you can use this command:

```
ENV=production ansible-vault view ansible/vars/$ENV/${ENV}_vault.yml --vault-password-file=~/.vault_pass_${ENV}.txt
```

#### Encrypting / Decrypting files
**CAUTION**: Make sure that you re-encrypt any files with the correct key before committing them.

The following command can be used to encrypt and decrypt files:

```
ENV=production && ansible-vault [encrypt|decrypt] --vault-password-file=~/.vault_pass_${ENV}.txt filename
```

For more info on Vault see the [Ansible Documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/playbooks_vault.html)

Commit message:

do not encourage storing vault password in a plaintext file
use --ask-vault-pass instead of --vault-password-file

README.md, after:

# Ansible deployment orchestration and configuration management

[![Build
Status](https://travis-ci.org/dimagi/commcarehq-ansible.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/dimagi/commcarehq-ansible)

This repository represents a workable role for deploying a single new
"webworker" to a given stack for the commcare-hq application.

To test the role, a vagrant file has been added that will provide the required
servers for a multi-machine deployment similar to the US production stack
described in
[Dimagi devops needs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tQFDC56SU8N1M-1abDWpnQKti2zYroTPBC2EmeIM8SA/pub)

Begin by checkout out the source for this repostiory:

```
$ git clone https://github.com/dimagi/commcarehq-ansible
```

Then install the git hooks:

```
./git-hooks/install.sh
```

Now you can change directories into the new clone and set up submodules:

```
$ cd commcarehq-ansible
$ git submodule init
$ git submodule update
```

Ensure you have downloaded Vagrant and virtual box
If you needed to download virtual box, you should also download a box configuration:
```
vagrant box add precise64 http://files.vagrantup.com/precise64.box
```

### Mutli-machine cluster setup

Then start vagrant:

```
$ vagrant up
```

If you run into issues starting vagrant, see the troubleshooting section at the bottom.

The `./reset-vms` command can be run at any time, possibly with a subset of the
VM names, to reset the VMs to their initial state and provision them with your
SSH key. Run `./reset-vms` without arguments for usage info.

Once this is done, you may ssh into the control server and run a full deployment:

```
$ vagrant ssh control
...
$ ansible-playbook -i inventories/development -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml' deploy_stack.yml
```

This will build a database server, a proxy server and a single web worker,
hooked into both appropriately.

Once the preliminary deployment is complete, a new web worker may be added
simply by editing the file `ansible/inventories/development` and adding the second
web worker server IP address. Also uncomment the section of the vagrant file that refers to 'app2':

```ini
[webworkers]
192.168.33.15
192.168.33.18
```

### Monolith setup

Sometimes multi machine setup locally can be very large. In order to setup a monolith, which is just one machine, you can use this setup:
```
cp Vagrantfile-monolith Vagrantfile
vagrant up
```
The one other change needed is to point to the proper inventory. Instead of using `ansible/inventories/development`, use `ansible/inventories/monolith`:

```
$ vagrant ssh control
...
$ ansible-playbook -i inventories/monolith -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml' deploy_stack.yml
```

### Email setup

In order to have this set up send email without crashing
(which you need to do during a deploy, for example)
run a debug smtp server daemon on control:

```bash
$ vagrant ssh control
...
$ python -m smtpd -n -c DebuggingServer 0.0.0.0:1025
```

### Troubleshooting

`vagrant up` fails.
* Start VirtualBox `$ VirtualBox`
  * Or on a Mac, `$ sudo /Library/StartupItems/VirtualBox/VirtualBox restart`
* Attempt to start the VM
  * If the error message is: `VT-x needs to be enabled in BIOS`
For the Lenovo T440s: 
  * Restart machine, press Enter during startup
  * Navigate to Security -> Virtualization
    * Turn both settings on


### Running only parts of the playbook

- Update localsettings:
  ```bash
  ansible-playbook -i inventories/development -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml'  deploy_stack.yml --tags=localsettings
  ```
- Skip the common setup, including apt installs and updating the commcarehq code:
  ```bash
  ansible-playbook -i inventories/development -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml'  deploy_stack.yml --skip-tags=common
  ```

Tags available:

- apache2
- aptcache
- common
- deploy
- git
- keystore
- ksplice
- localsettings
- newrelic
- slow

Note: to generate this list automatically, you can run something like

```bash
ansible-playbook -u root -i ../../commcare-hq/fab/inventory/india deploy_stack.yml -e "@../config/india/india.yml" --tags= | sed 's/ERROR: tag(s) not found in playbook: .  possible values: //g' | sed 's/,/\
/g' | xargs -I% echo - %
```


### Setting up ansible control machine

```bash
ansible-playbook -u root -i inventories/localhost deploy_control.yml -e "@../config/$ENV/$ENV.yml" --ask-sudo-pass
```

### Use your ssh key to authenticate

Ansible forwards SSH requests through your local machine to authenticate with
remote servers.  This way authentication originates from your machine and your
credentials, and the ansible machine doesn't need its own auth to communicate
with other servers managed with ansible.

SSH `ForwardAgent` can be enabled by passing the `-A` flag on the command line:
```bash
$ ssh -A control.internal-va.commcarehq.org
```

You can also enable it automatically for an alias in your ssh config (note that
you then must use the alias `$ ssh control` for the settings to take effect)
```
# ~/.ssh/config
Host control
    Hostname control.internal-va.commcarehq.org
    ForwardAgent yes
```

Be careful not to enable `ForwardAgent` for untrusted hosts.

You cannot use ssh forwarding with `mosh`, so you cannot use mosh for ansible.

[troubleshooting](https://developer.github.com/guides/using-ssh-agent-forwarding/)

### Setting up a dev account on ansible control machine

You must ssh in as your dev user, with SSH `ForwardAgent` enabled (see above).

```bash
git clone git@github.com:dimagi/commcarehq-ansible
. commcarehq-ansible/control/init.sh
update-code

# optional: make subsequent logins a bit more convenient
echo '[ -t 1 ] && source ~/init-ansible' >> ~/.profile
```

On subsequent logins if optional step was not done.

```bash
. init-ansible
```

Setup the vault password files as described below in [Managing secrets with Vault](#managing-secrets-with-vault)


### Simulate dev user setup on vagrant control machine
Add a record for your user to `dev_users.present` in `ansible/vars/dev/dev_public.yml` and your SSH public key to
`ansible/vars/dev/users/{username}.pub`.

Login with `vagrant ssh control`

```bash
ansible-playbook -u root -i inventories/development deploy_control.yml -e '@vars/dev/dev_private.yml' -e '@vars/dev/dev_public.yml' --diff
```

Login as your user: `vagrant ssh control -- -l $USER -A

```bash
ln -s /vagrant ~/commcarehq-ansible
. commcarehq-ansible/control/init.sh
echo '[ -t 1 ] && source ~/init-ansible' >> ~/.profile

# run ansible
ansible-playbook -u ansible --ask-sudo-pass -i inventories/development \
  -e @vars/dev.yml --diff deploy_stack.yml --tags=users,ssh # or whatever
```

### Managing secrets with Vault
**IMPORTANT**: Install the git hooks to help ensure you never commit secrets into the repo: `./git-hooks/install.sh`

All the secret variables and private data required for the different environments is included
in this repository as encrypted files (`${ENV}_vault.yml`).

To edit these files you need to provide them on the command line when prompted (keys stored in CommCare Keepass).

To use these files with `ansible-playbook` include the `--ask-vault-pass` param.
(This is included for your convenience in the `ap` and `aps` aliases.)

#### Viewing / Editing encrypted files
You can use Vault's built in editing capability as follows:

```
ENV=production ansible-vault edit ansible/vars/$ENV/${ENV}_vault.yml
```

This will decrypt the file for editing and re-encrypt it after. Note that even if no changes
are made to the file the encrypted contents will have changed.

If you just want to view the contents of the file you can use this command:

```
ENV=production ansible-vault view ansible/vars/$ENV/${ENV}_vault.yml
```

#### Encrypting / Decrypting files
**CAUTION**: Make sure that you re-encrypt any files with the correct key before committing them.

The following command can be used to encrypt and decrypt files:

```
ENV=production && ansible-vault [encrypt|decrypt] filename
```

For more info on Vault see the [Ansible Documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/playbooks_vault.html)
