<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# 53. upgrade-redis

**Date:** 2022-08-23

**Optional per env:** _required on all environments_


## CommCare Version Dependency
This change is not known to be dependent on any particular version of CommCare.


## Change Context
This change upgrade Redis from 4.0.8 to 6.x version.
As part of our ongoing effort to keep CommCare HQ up to date with the latest tools and
libraries we have updated Redis from version 4.0.8 to version 6.2.

## Details
Redis is strongly backwards compatible, so no coordination with the CommCare HQ codebase is required before this upgrade.
However, after six weeks, from this announcement, new changes to CommCare HQ will no longer be guaranteed
to be compatible with Redis 4.0.8, so we strongly recommend applying this upgrade as soon as possible.

## Steps to update
Before you start, make sure that you have backed up the existing Redis database servers
to a remote location.

0. For developers running redis in local machine:
   If you are using docker for local development you need to update the image for docker you can follow these steps

    - Stop the current running container
    ```bash
    ./scripts/docker stop redis
    ```

    - Remove the previous image

    ```bash
    docker rmi --force redis
    ```

    - Start the docker container
    ```bash
    ./scripts/docker up redis
    ```

    If you face any errors while starting the container you can delete the data in the docker volume, ideally it is in

    ```bash
    ~/.local/share/dockerhq/redis
    ```

    Incase if you would like to backup your redis data, then save it. `dump.rdb` file will be created under `~/.local/share/dockerhq/redis` directory
    copy it to different location.

    ```bash
    docker exec -it hqservice_redis_1 redis-cli BGSAVE
    ```

1. For users running postgresql on Linux machines:
    command:
      - cchq <env> ap deploy_redis.yml --branch=<branchName>
