<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# 65. Populate repeater names

**Date:** 2022-12-13

**Optional per env:** _only required on some environments_


## CommCare Version Dependency
The following version of CommCare must be deployed before rolling out this change:
[ec13eacc](https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-hq/commit/ec13eaccc55d14b708c4e25349edcfd6936fb4d1)


## Change Context
Populate all repeaters' `name` fields with its respective connection settings' name.

This is optional, but is recommended to do for all environments having more than 200 repeaters. A migration will
be added in the future, which will automatically apply these changes during a code deploy if they have not yet
been applied. If there are many repeaters, it will slow down the migration process.

## Details
To prepare for a future change where we allow repeater names to be configurable, we added a `name` field to the
`repeaters_repeater` table. In the future change, this field will be populated with the repeater's corresponding
connection settings' name by means of a migration. If there are many repeaters in the environment, this migration
might take a long time to complete, so it is recommended to apply the changes before that migration runs in order
speed up that migration's execution time.

## Steps to update
To see how many repeaters there are in an environment, follow the steps below:

Go into the django shell
```shell
commcare-cloud <env> django-manage shell
```

Inside the django shell, run
```python
from corehq.motech.repeaters.models import SQLRepeater
SQLRepeater.objects.count()
```

To run the data migration, execute the following command:

```shell
commcare-cloud <env> django-manage populate_repeater_names 
```

Precautions:
* No downtime is needed for this operation. However, it is best to run the command during a period
  of low traffic.
