<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# 44. Migrate forms & cases from Couch to SQL

**Date:** 2021-06-09

**Optional per env:** _required on all environments_


## CommCare Version Dependency
CommCare versions beyond the following commit require this change to function correctly:
[8f11208a](https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-hq/commit/8f11208ad6510473003ef4c5eef74fa5e1bc1bed)


## Change Context
A series of management commands must be run to check for and migrate domains'
forms & cases from Couch to SQL.

## Details
Historically CommCareHQ stored form submissions and case data in CouchDB.
About 5 years ago the default storage backend was changed from Couch to SQL,
and all domains created since then should be using the SQL backend. However,
a bug allowed some Couch domains to be created since then. It is recommended
to check for and migrate all relevant domains since the Couch form processor
is slated for removal, and domains using it will stop working if they are not
migrated before that happens.

## Steps to update
Follow the steps outlined in the 
[migration document](https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-hq/blob/8f11208ad6510473003ef4c5eef74fa5e1bc1bed/corehq/apps/couch_sql_migration/README.md)
to find and migrate all Couch domains in your environment.

It is necessary to check out an older version of CommCareHQ to run the
migration since the migration code has been deleted on the main branch.
After running the command `cd $RELEASE_PATH` in the [setup steps](https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-hq/blob/8f11208ad6510473003ef4c5eef74fa5e1bc1bed/corehq/apps/couch_sql_migration/README.md#setup),
run the following command to checkout a version that contains the migration
code:

```sh
git checkout 8f11208ad6510473003ef4c5eef74fa5e1bc1bed
```
