<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# 47. Update PgBouncer configuration to support multiple processes

**Date:** 2022-04-19

**Optional per env:** _required on all environments_


## CommCare Version Dependency
This change is not known to be dependent on any particular version of CommCare.


## Change Context
This change updates the PgBouncer role to support multiple processes
on a single machine, so that more CPU cores can be used (PgBouncer
is single-threaded and uses only one CPU core by default).

## Details
A new variable `pgbouncer_processes` (default: 1) is now available,
which can be set per environment for all machines or in the inventory
for each machine to indicate the desired number of processes.

The role needs to be re-run to create the new systemd service and update
the configuration. It will also upgrade PgBouncer to the latest version
and sets the minimum required version to 1.13, which includes the necessary
new features (`so_reuseport` and systemd `notify` support).

The name of the service(s) is now `pgbouncer-multiprocess@1`, ...,
`pgbouncer-multiprocess@N`, where `N` is the value of `pgbouncer_processes`.
`pgbouncer-multiprocess@*` can also be used to target all of the existing
processes.

`pgbouncer_pool_size` and `pgbouncer_reserve_pool_size` continue to
indicate the total number for each machine, which will be divided between
the defined number of processes.

## Steps to update
1. Set the `pgbouncer_processes` variable as desired (in the environment
or the inventory).

2. Run `commcare-cloud <env> ansible-playbook deploy_postgres.yml
--tags=pgbouncer --limit=pgbouncer`  
**Warning:** this will restart the PgBouncer service, dropping existing
connections.

At a later time, `pgbouncer_processes` and configuration settings can also
be changed without triggering a full restart, running

`cchq <env> ansible-playbook deploy_postgres.yml --tags=configure
--limit=pgbouncer`

which, if needed, will trigger a reload and add/remove processes.

Note however that a manual restart (e.g. `commcare-cloud <env>
run-shell-command pgbouncer "systemctl restart pgbouncer-multiprocess@*"
-b`) could be needed to apply new values of `pgbouncer_pool_size` and
`pgbouncer_reserve_pool_size`, because, after a reload, they will only be
effective when the pool is exhausted and recreated, which is unlikely to
happen during normal operations.
