<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# About this changelog

The following changes to `commcare-cloud` that require your attention,
newest first.

## Changelog

### **2020-07-09** [Switch to new package manager](0035-new-js-package-manager.md)
To stay up to date with javascript package security alerts, we need to make sure we are using a javascript package manager
that is supported by Github.

### **2020-04-16** [Update git to the latest version](0034-update-git.md)
Due to a [high-severity security advisory](https://github.com/git/git/security/advisories/GHSA-qm7j-c969-7j4q) on the popular version control software program `git`,
observing security best practices dictates upgrading to one of the git versions designated as "Patched"
such as 2.26.1.

### **2020-02-28** [Update `deploy` CommandArgs](0033-update-deploy-args.md)
We are adding support for deploying from a specific commit hash or tag, replacing
the deploy command's `commcare-branch` argument with a more general `commcare-rev` argument.

### **2020-02-05** [ES upgrade from 1.7.6 to 2.4.6](0032-upgrade-to-elasticsearch-2.4.6.md)
This change upgrade Elasticsearch from 1.7.6 to 2.4.6 version.
CommCare HQ releases after April 2, 2020 will not continue to support Elasticsearch 1.7.6,
so we strongly recommend applying this change before then.

### **2019-11-06** [Update Formplayer Configuration](0031-update-formplayer-config.md)
Some properties in the Formplayer configuration have changed names.

### **2019-08-30** [Upgrade Sentry](0030-upgrade-sentry.md)
The Sentry SDK used by CommCare HQ has been updated and along with it we have updated the
configuration parameters.

### **2019-08-23** [Add `deploy` Command](0029-add-deploy-command.md)
In order to provide a consistent user interface while making underlying changes,
we are replacing the `commcare-cloud <env> fab deploy` command with a more concise
`commcare-cloud <env> deploy` command.

### **2019-08-23** [Removing support for Riak CS](0028-remove-riak.md)
We are removing support for deploying Riak CS clusters in commcare-cloud

### **2019-08-23** [Fix python3 virutalenvs (Deprecated)](0027-fix-python3-virtualenv.md)
**Update (2019-11-27)**: This fix is no longer necessary as it has been superceded by changes
to the deploy script that make this change automatically if necessary.

This fixes a bug with how python3 virtualenvs were created by ansible. This fix needs to be applied to any
machine which has a python3 virtualenv that was created by commcare-cloud.

The fix is also safe to run on all CommCare hosts.

### **2019-08-21** [Move remaining management commands explicitly](0026-move-remaining-management-commands.md)
This change requires editing `app-processes.yml` to add some of processes to the `management_comamnds`
section

### **2019-08-20** [Rename management commands explicitly](0025-rename-management-commands.md)
This change requires editing `app-processes.yml` to rename some of the processes in the `management_comamnds`
section

### **2019-07-17** [Define management commands explicitly](0024-define-management-commands.md)
This change requires changing app-processes.yml to include a list of management comamnds to run

### **2018-07-18** [Upgrade to Python 3](0023-upgrade-to-python-3.md)
This change installs Python 3.6.8, builds a new virtualenv, and runs
CommCare HQ in Python 3.

### **2019-05-13** [Install Pango](0022-install-pango.md)
This change installs pango and its dependencies for the weasyprint
library which has been added as a requirement to commcare-hq for
proper pdf printing of unicode fonts

### **2019-02-26** [Fix to restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0021-fix-letsencrypt-restart-nginx.md)
Previously you had to manually restart nginx every time letsencrypt auto-renewed,
which was about every two months. We believed we had fixed this with
[Restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0010-letsencrypt-restart-nginx),
but there was an error in our setup at that time that made it not work as intended.

### **2019-04-05** [Update RabbitMQ logging configuration](0020-update-rabbitmq-logging.md)
This change updates the RabbitMQ logging configuration to change the
log level from `info` to `warning`.

### **2019-02-27** [Remove celery results backend from localsettings](0019-remove-celery-results-backend-from-localsettings.md)
Upgrading to celery 4.x requires removing the dependency on
django-celery, which means that its results backend will no
longer be available.  This removes the django-celery backend
as the default from localsettings, so the results backend can
be specified by commcare-hq settings instead.

### **2019-02-26** [Split pgbouncer vars from postgresql vars](0018-split_pgbouncer_postgresql_vars.md)
This change extracts a new role from the existing postgresql role for installing
and configuring pgbouncer.

As a result of this change the `postgresql.yml` environment configuration file
needs to be changed to split out the postgresql vars from the pgbouncer vars.

### **2019-02-27** [Only monitor specific RabbitMQ queues](0017-monitor-specific-rabbitmq-queues.md)
Datadog RabbitMQ monitoring restricts the number of queues it
can monitor to 200. To avoid hitting this limit on large
scale deployments we limit the queues being monitored to only
the primary queues.

### **2019-02-22** [Update supervisor confs to invoke celery directly](0016-invoke-celery-directly.md)
Upgrading to celery 4.x requires removing the dependency on
django-celery, which means that the celery management command
becomes unavailable.  This prepares for that by invoking the
celery command directly.

### **2019-02-22** [Separate celery datadog http check](0015-separate-celery-datadog-http-check.md)
This adds a specific http check for the celery check (serverup.txt?only=celery)
to datadog.
Environments that are not relying on datadog for monitoring can ignore this change.

### **2019-02-11** [Add tag to datadog http checks](0014-add-tag-to-datadog-http-checks.md)
This change adds "check_type" tag to the http_check datadog integration.
This change applies only to envs using datadog for monitoring.

### **2019-02-11** [Java upgrade for formplayer](0013-java-upgrade-for-formplayer.md)
Previously, Formplayer was running on Java 7.
This change updates us to Java 8 for formplayer.

### **2019-02-01** [Generalize load case from fixture feature](0012-generalize-load-case-from-fixture.md)
Previously loading a case from a fixture required the fixture to be an attribute.
This change allows using non-attributes from the fixture.

### **2019-01-16** [Fix encrypted temp directory permissions](0011-fix-encrypted-tmp-permissions.md)
This is a followup to [Added encrypted temporary directory](./0001-add-encrypted-tmp.md)
in which we introduced an encrypted directory for temp files.
In its original implementation, this file was owned by root,
and processes were unable to write to it.

This changes the directory to be owned by cchq, allowing our processes to write to the file.

### **2019-01-02** [Restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0010-letsencrypt-restart-nginx.md)
**Update 2019-02-26**: There was a bug in this fix and it has been superceded by
[Fix to restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0021-fix-letsencrypt-restart-nginx).

Previously you had to manually restart nginx every time letsencrypt auto-renewed,
which was about every two months.

### **2018-12-15** [Blob Metadata Migration - part 2](0009-blob-metadata-part-2.md)
Form submission attachment metadata is being consolidated in the blob
metadata table in SQL. This migration consists of a series of commands that
will consolidate the data in your environment.

### **2018-09-24** [Blob Metadata Migration - part 1](0008-blob-metadata-part-1.md)
Blob metadata needs to be migrated from CouchDB to SQL. This migration
consists of a series of commands that will move the data in your environment.

### **2018-11-26** [Reorganize pillows](0007-reorganize-pillows.md)
Pillows read changes from kafka and do various processing such as sending them to
elasticsearch, transforming into a UCR table row etc. A doc for same change is read
multiple times for each processor, since there are separte pillows for each processor.
This is inefficient, so we have combined multiple processors that apply for a
given document type (also called `KAFKA_TOPIC`) such as form/case/user under
one pillow. For e.g. A new single `case-pillow` pillow replaces
various old pillows that process case changes such as `CaseToElasticsearchPillow`,
`CaseSearchToElasticsearchPillow`, `ReportCaseToElasticsearchPillow`,
and `kafka-ucr-main` etc. 

### **2018-11-20** [New Case Importer Celery Queue](0006-new-case-importer-celery-queue.md)
Importing cases is often a time-sensitive task, and prolonged backlogs are
very visible to users.  It will be useful to have a separate queue
specifically for case imports, to improve visibility into backups as well as
typical runtimes.  Additionally, this is a first step towards allocating
resources specifically for case imports, should that become necessary.

### **2018-08-16** [Support multiple Kafka brokers](0005-support-multiple-kafak-brokers.md)
Large scale deployments of CommCare require scaling out Kafka brokers to support the high
traffic volume (as well as for high availability). Up until now CommCare has only
supported a single broker.

### **2018-08-16** [Add queue for analytics tasks](0004-add-analytics-queue.md)
Tasks for analytics reporting have been separated into a new analytics celery queue.

### **2018-07-25** [Update Supervisor](0003-update-supervisor.md)
Ubuntu 14.04 `apt-get install supervisor` installs supervisor 3.0b.
We occasionally have issues that could be related to supervisor,
such as processes not stopping correctly.
To rule it out as a possible cause,
we decided it was better to be on a later version of supervisor,
and one that's not in beta.

### **2018-07-13** [Update supervisor service definitions](0002-supervisor-service-definitions.md)
There are several CommCare specific processes that are defined in supervisor
configuration files. This change decouples the process definitions from code.

### **2018-06-11** [Added encrypted temporary directory](0001-add-encrypted-tmp.md)
Some of the CommCare processes make use of temporary files to store client data
(such as data exports) so in order to keep that data protected we have modified
the setup to use an encrypted temporary directory.
