<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# 29. Add `deploy` Command

**Date:** 2019-08-23

**Optional per env:** _required on all environments_


## CommCare Version Dependency
This change is not known to be dependent on any particular version of CommCare.


## Change Context
In order to provide a consistent user interface while making underlying changes,
we are replacing the `commcare-cloud <env> fab deploy` command with a more concise
`commcare-cloud <env> deploy` command.

## Details
Previously, to update to the latest version of CommCare, we recommended using commcare-cloud's
`fab deploy` command. As part of an effort to present a consistent user interface in the future
and to keep all of deploy's options and features well documented in CLI help text and
online command docs, we will be switching to a top-level more simply-named `deploy` command.
It currently executes the same code as `fab deploy` did before it, but as we add or rewrite
functionality in the future, we are no longer tied to using fab as the underlying tool.
We hope this will help us continue to improve our tooling in the future with minimal effect
on your normal routine.

## Steps to update
The only change you need to make is where you were previously using
`commcare-cloud <env> fab deploy` to update your servers to the latest version of CommCare,
you should now use `commcare-cloud <env> deploy`.

See `commcare-cloud <env> deploy -h` for the full list of options on this new command.
