<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# 82. Unicel SMS Gateway Removal

**Date:** 2024-07-25

**Optional per env:** _only required on some environments_


## CommCare Version Dependency
This change is not known to be dependent on any particular version of CommCare.


## Change Context
This is a notice specifically for projects with Unicel configured as an SMS gateway, which is no longer functional.
Projects that are not using the Unicel gateway do not need to take any action.

## Details
Starting June 1st, 2020, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) issued a change in SMS regulations that
restricts SMS gateways to sending only pre-approved template messages. Given the flexible nature of CommCare Messaging,
which allows users to configure custom SMSs, this change has made it challenging for us to continue operating the Unicel
gateway effectively in India. Therefore, effective August 1, 2024, the Unicel gateway will no longer be available as an
option under the [SMS Connectivity page](https://dimagi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/commcarepublic/pages/2143955324/Setup+SMS+Connection).

## Steps to update
Projects that are not using the Unicel gateway do not need to take any action. Likewise, projects that do not use or
plan to use messaging do not need to take any action. After the deprecation, projects with Unicel configured as the only
gateway will default to having no SMS provider. 

If you do plan on sending messages for your project, we recommend transitioning to a new SMS gateway by following the
instructions in [this wiki](https://dimagi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/commcarepublic/pages/2143955324/Setup+SMS+Connection).
- First, navigate to SMS Connectivity settings by following the instructions in the wiki.
- Then, select "Set as default" next to the new gateway of your choice.
- Finally, go to [SMS reports](https://dimagi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/commcarepublic/pages/2143945812/CommCare+Messaging+Reports) on your project space to ensure that all messages are sent correctly.

Please note that selecting a new gateway may have cost implications. To learn more about the cost of
SMS with different gateway providers, please refer to our [wiki](https://dimagi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/commcarepublic/pages/2143950358/CommCare+Pricing+FAQs#Fees-for-SMS).
