<!--THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED: DO NOT EDIT-->
<!--See https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-cloud/blob/master/changelog/README.md for instructions-->
# About this changelog

Below are the list of changes (the newest first) to `commcare-cloud` and CommCareHQ that
need to be applied on your environment to keep it up to date.

### Changelog

#### **2025-07-10** [Remove PARSER_CLASS from redis settings](0089-remove-parser-class.md)
We've remove the PARSER_CLASS when configuring redis in settings.py.


---
#### **2025-05-08** [Install uv for Python dependency management](0088-install-uv.md)
CommCare HQ is moving to using `uv` for Python dependency management, which
simplifies and speeds up dependency installation.


---
#### **2025-04-16** [Upgrade to Elasticsearch 6](0087-upgrade-to-es-6.md)
Upgrade to Elasticsearch 6.
This changelog outlines the steps required to `reindex` all indices and then perform the upgrade from Elasticsearch 5.6.16 to 6.8.23.


---
#### **2025-03-27** [AWS S3 Client Library Upgrade](0086-s3-library-upgrade.md)
The `botocore` library is being upgraded in CommCare HQ. A blob db
configuration change may be necessary prior to deploying the new version.


---
#### **2025-03-21** [Removing websockets](0085-remove_websockets.md)
All code related to websockets is being removed from both CommCare HQ and CommCare-Cloud.


---
#### **2024-11-06** [New Geospatial Celery Queue](0084-add-geospatial-queue.md)
The Microplanning feature requires the location properties on cases to be indexed correctly so
that they can be used correctly in this feature. A separate queue is added to handle this indexing
process when the Microplanning feature is enabled for a domain. This can potentially be a long-running
task, and so having a separate queue ensures that other queues do not get clogged up by this indexing task.


---
#### **2024-10-25** [Database Backup Retention Change](0083-database_backup_retention_change.md)
The logic used to retain database backups has been modified to better respect the settings that specify
how many days to keep backups.


---
#### **2024-07-25** [Unicel SMS Gateway Removal](0082-unicel-sms-gateway-removal.md)
This is a notice specifically for projects with Unicel configured as an SMS gateway, which is no longer functional.
Projects that are not using the Unicel gateway do not need to take any action.


---
#### **2024-06-18** [SQL Repeat Record Migration - Delete Unused Couch Data](0081-delete-receiverwrapper-couch-db.md)
Optional: Delete unused forwarding data from Couch.


---
#### **2024-04-30** [Copy Supply Point data to Invitation model Location Field](0080-copy-invitation-supply-point-fields-to-location.md)
Copy data from `supply_point` field to `location` field in `Invitation` model to prevent errors with
future migrations to the `users_invitation` table.

This operation is required for all environments regardless of feature usage.


---
#### **2024-02-13** [SQL Repeat Record Migration addendum](0079-sql-repeatrecord-addendum.md)
Optional: Copy repeat records with deleted repeaters from Couch to SQL


---
#### **2024-03-29** [Upgrade To Node 20](0078-upgrade-to-node-20.md)
Node.js 16.x LTS is reaching its end of life 15th June 2024, so node and npm must be upgraded on all machines.


---
#### **2024-02-13** [SQL Repeat Record Migration](0077-sql-repeatrecord-pr1.md)
Prepare for and migrate Repeat Records from Couch to SQL.


---
#### **2024-01-14** [Elasticsearch upgrade from 2.4.6 to 5.6.16](0076-upgrade-to-es-5.md)
Upgrade to Elasticsearch 5.

CommCare HQ releases after March 1, 2024 will not support Elasticsearch 2.x.
So we strongly recommend applying this change before then.


---
#### **2023-10-25** [Reindex All Indices For Elasticsearch Upgrade](0075-reindex-all-indexes-for-es-upgrade.md)
Reindex Elasticsearch Indices for upcoming ES Upgrade.


---
#### **2023-09-12** [update-to-python-3.9.18](0074-update-to-python-3.9.18.md)
Installs python 3.9.18 and build a new virutalenv for CommCare HQ


---
#### **2023-06-14** [Prepare project spaces for Case List Explorer report release](0073-prepare-for-cle-ga.md)
We have created a management command to assist with syncing data to the Case Search Index so that legacy projects 
may access data in a new report that will be made generally available.


---
#### **2023-04-10** [upgrade-redis-to-v7](0072-upgrade-redis-to-v7.md)
This change upgrade Redis from 6.x to 7.0 version.
As part of our ongoing effort to keep CommCare HQ up to date with the latest tools and libraries we have updated Redis from version 6.2 to version 7.0.


---
#### **2023-03-23** [Upgrade to Ubuntu 22.04](0071-upgrade_to_ubuntu_22.04.md)
On April 1, 2023, the operating system that commcare-cloud has supported for the last 4-5 years,
Ubuntu 18.04 "Bionic Beaver", will reach its end of life for support from its maintainer.

We are requiring that all CommCare HQ instances be upgraded to Ubuntu 22.04 "Jammy Jellyfish"
by July 1, 2023, in order to continue using commcare-cloud.
**Failure to update by this date will result in increasingly unexpected
behavior possibly including downtime and data loss.**

Schedule maintenance for a time well before July 1, 2023,
during which you should expect a downtime of up to many hours.
We also recommend making contingency plans
in case issues arise during the first attempt at applying this maintenance.
For example, you may want to set an early date in April, with backup dates in May and June
in case issues arise during the first attempt.


---
#### **2023-03-09** [Update Node to v16](0070-update-node-to-v16.md)
Node.js 14.x LTS is reaching its end of life 30th April 2023, so node and npm must be upgraded on all machines.


---
#### **2023-01-10** [Configure Java 17 for Formplayer](0069-configure-java-17-for-formplayer.md)
In preparation for the release of Formplayer Java 17 version, we have shipped a few infrastructure changes through Commcare Cloud. 
At this point, the ask to those maintaining CommCare instances is to follow the steps below to configure Java 17 for Formplayer.


---
#### **2023-01-10** [Install Dart Sass as npm global dependency in preparation of Bootstrap upgrade](0068-install-dart-sass.md)
Install Dart Sass as global NPM library. 


---
#### **2022-12-20** [Dropping support for 3.6](0067-dropping-3.6-support.md)
Commcare-cloud will no longer attempt to support Python 3.6. We strongly
encourage you to follow the steps below to upgrade to Python 3.10 if you have
not done so already.


---
#### **2022-12-13** [remove-unused-elastic-settings](0066-remove-unused-elastic-settings.md)
CommCareHQ has two settings (`CASE_ES_DROP_FORM_FIELDS` and
`ES_XFORM_DISABLE_ALL`) that were created several years ago for tuning
Elasticsearch in a specific environment which no longer exists. This change
removes support for those settings and the application logic that existed for
them. We do not expect this to impact any self-hosted environments, but it's
prudent to confirm.


---
#### **2022-12-13** [Populate a new field for Data Forwarders](0065-Populate_repeater_names.md)
Populate a new field for all Data Forwarders (repeaters).

This is optional, but is recommended to do for all environments where Data Forwarders are being used. A migration
will be added in the future, which will automatically apply these changes during a code deploy if they have not
yet been applied. If there are many Data Forwarders, it will slow down the deploy process.


---
#### **2022-11-28** [New script added for virtualenv activation](0064-new-script-for-venv-activation.md)
Instructions to resolve this issue connecting to remote machines:
"/home/<user>/commcare-cloud/control/activate_venv.sh: No such file or directory"


---
#### **2022-11-11** [Backfill SMS event data for API performance](0063-backfill_sms_event_data_for_api_performance.md)
Backfill data in the `sms_smssubevent` table to improve the performance of the 'messaging-event' API.

This operation is only required if your environment is using SMS or Email workflows. Furthermore,
an automatic migration will be added to CommCare in the future which will apply these changes
during a code deploy if they have not already been applied.


---
#### **2022-11-08** [kafka-upgrade-to-3.2.3](0062-kafka-upgrade-to-3.2.3.md)
Run command to upgrade Kafka version  to 3.2.3 
Update Scala version to recommended version 2.13 


---
#### **2022-11-08** [Install Elasticsearch Phonetic Analysis Plugin](0061-install-elasticsearch-phonetic-analysis-plugin.md)
The Elasticsearch 'case search' index now requires the [phonetic analysis][plugin docs] plugin
to be install in Elasticsearch.

[plugin docs]: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/plugins/2.4/analysis-phonetic.html


---
#### **2022-11-07** [Upgrade to Python 3.10](0060-upgrade-to-python-3-10.md)
Follow these steps to install and use Python 3.10 on your control machine(s) by December 19th, 2022.


---
#### **2022-11-01** [postgres-v14-upgrade](0059-postgres-v14-upgrade.md)
Postgres upgrade is recommended to be upgraded in two steps,upgrade from v10 to v13 and then to v14. 
This change upgrade PostgreSQL from 10 to 13 and then to 14 version.
As part of our ongoing effort to keep CommCare HQ up to date with the latest tools and libraries we have updated PostgreSQL from version 10 to version 14. 


---
#### **2022-10-30** [RabbitMQ upgrade to 3.10.7 version](0058-RabbitMQ_upgrade_to_3.10.7_version.md)
This change upgrade RabbitMQ 3.10.7 version. 
The current installed RabbitMQ version 3.8.5 is already End of Life. 
So, we strongly recommend applying this change. 


---
#### **2022-09-15** [Update Prometheus variable](0057-update-prometheus-variable.md)
If using prometheus, run `update-config` to apply changes to prometheus environment variable.


---
#### **2022-09-15** [upgrade-kafka_3.2.0](0056-upgrade-kafka_3.2.0.md)
Run command to upgrade Kafka version which 2.6.1 to 3.2.0
Update Scala version to recommended version 2.13


---
#### **2022-09-14** [bootstrap-userrole-auditing](0055-bootstrap-userrole-auditing.md)
Run command to create bootstrap audit records for existing user role records.


---
#### **2022-09-05** [upgrade-zookeeper_3.7.1](0054-upgrade-zookeeper_3.7.1.md)
Run command to upgrade Zookeeper version which 3.2.0 to 3.7.1


---
#### **2022-08-23** [upgrade-redis](0053-upgrade-redis.md)
This change upgrade Redis from 4.0.8 to 6.x version.
As part of our ongoing effort to keep CommCare HQ up to date with the latest tools and
libraries we have updated Redis from version 4.0.8 to version 6.2.


---
#### **2022-08-19** [upgrade-ansible](0052-upgrade-ansible.md)
Run command to uninstall older ansible version which 2.9.26 and install 4.2.0


---
#### **2022-08-11** [historical-auditcare-data-migration](0051-historical-auditcare-data-migration.md)
Instructions regarding Migrating Historical Auditcare data to SQL.


---
#### **2022-06-17** [Remove report_cases and report_xforms indices](0050-remove-report-indices.md)
CommCareHQ has two elasticsearch indices "report_cases" and "report_xforms"
that were created many years ago for some custom reports, but which haven't
been used in some time. This change deletes those indices and the change
processors used to populate them. We do not expect this to impact any
self-hosted environments, but it's prudent to confirm.


---
#### **2022-06-03** [Postgres upgrade from 9.6 to 10](0049-upgrade-to-postgres-10.md)
This change upgrade PostgreSQL from 9.6 to 10 version.
As part of our ongoing effort to keep CommCare HQ up to date with the latest tools and
libraries we have updated PostgreSQL from version 9.6 to version 10.


---
#### **2022-05-25** [update-supervisor-confs](0048-update-supervisor-confs.md)
Run command to update shell runner scripts for django and celery.


---
#### **2022-04-19** [Update PgBouncer configuration to support multiple processes](0047-pgbouncer-multiprocess.md)
This change updates the PgBouncer role to support multiple processes
on a single machine, so that more CPU cores can be used (PgBouncer
is single-threaded and uses only one CPU core by default).


---
#### **2022-04-11** [Upgrade Node.js to 14.19.1 and npm to 7.24.2](0046-upgrade_node_14x_npm_7x.md)
Node.js 12.x LTS is reaching its end of life 30th April 2022, so node and npm must be upgraded on all machines.


---
#### **2021-11-02** [Upgrade CommCare HQ to Python 3.9](0045-upgrade-to-python-39.md)
Install Python 3.9 and build a new virtualenv for CommCare HQ.


---
#### **2021-06-09** [Migrate forms & cases from Couch to SQL](0044-migrate-forms-to-sql.md)
A series of management commands must be run to check for and migrate domains'
forms & cases from Couch to SQL.


---
#### **2021-03-23** [Optionally configure auditcare db](0043-optionally-configure-auditcare-db.md)
Some enterprise deployments of CommCare use a backend feature called
"auditcare" as part of their audit logging strategy. Auditcare is enabled by
default, so it is active unless you went out of your way to disable it when
you configured CommCare. Historically it has used CouchDB as its data
backend, but it is being switched to use PostgreSQL instead. If you care
about this feature then you may want to carefully consider this change log
before your next commcare deploy; otherwise you can ignore.


---
#### **2021-03-16** [Update Formplayer request mapping](0042-update_formplayer_request_mapping.md)
A small change to the nginx request matching for Formplayer requests that will prevent
an additional `/` from being prepended to the Formplayer requests.


---
#### **2021-01-11** [Dropping support for Python 2](0041-python3-support.md)
Python 3.6 is supported and now the preferred version to use. In anticipation
of dropping Python 2 support, an error will be displayed when running commands
with Python 2. Instructions for upgrading to Python 3 are provided in the
error message. An option is provided to temporarily revert to Python 2 (see
update steps for details).

Python 2 support will end on 2021-03-04.


---
#### **2021-01-08** [Install new `apt` requirements on machines running commcarehq code](0040-install-new-apt-requirements.md)
We will be adding SAML 2.0 Single Sign On (SSO) support over the next few months which
requires installing new `apt` packages as dependencies of python requirements.


---
#### **2020-11-16** [update-letsencrypt-to-alternate-chain](0039-update-letsencrypt-to-alternate-chain.md)
On January 11 2021, Let's Encrypt will change its default certificate chain from using the legacy Identrust
root certificate, to its own modern ISRG root certificate. In order to maintain backwards compatibility with
existing mobile devices it is necessary to keep using the Identrust certificate chain.


---
#### **2020-10-22** [Update PostgreSQL monit configurations to be version specific](0038-update-postgresql-monit-conf.md)
Update PostgreSQL monit configuration files to be version specific and use `systemctl`


---
#### **2020-10-14** [Run command to update Supervisor configurations](0037-update-supervisor-confs.md)
Run management command to remove unused errand-boy processes.


---
#### **2020-07-23** [Run command to clear sensitive information from Django sessions](0036-clean-2fa-sessions.md)
It is stronly recommended to sanitize legacy Django sessions after upgrading
to Django 2.2.


---
#### **2020-07-09** [Switch to new package manager](0035-new-js-package-manager.md)
To stay up to date with javascript package security alerts, we need to make sure we are using a javascript package manager
that is supported by Github.


---
#### **2020-04-16** [Update git to the latest version](0034-update-git.md)
Due to a [high-severity security advisory](https://github.com/git/git/security/advisories/GHSA-qm7j-c969-7j4q) on the popular version control software program `git`,
observing security best practices dictates upgrading to one of the git versions designated as "Patched"
such as 2.26.1.


---
#### **2020-02-28** [Update `deploy` CommandArgs](0033-update-deploy-args.md)
We are adding support for deploying from a specific commit hash or tag, replacing
the deploy command's `commcare-branch` argument with a more general `commcare-rev` argument.


---
#### **2020-02-05** [ES upgrade from 1.7.6 to 2.4.6](0032-upgrade-to-elasticsearch-2.4.6.md)
This change upgrade Elasticsearch from 1.7.6 to 2.4.6 version.
CommCare HQ releases after April 2, 2020 will not continue to support Elasticsearch 1.7.6,
so we strongly recommend applying this change before then.


---
#### **2019-11-06** [Update Formplayer Configuration](0031-update-formplayer-config.md)
Some properties in the Formplayer configuration have changed names.


---
#### **2019-08-30** [Upgrade Sentry](0030-upgrade-sentry.md)
The Sentry SDK used by CommCare HQ has been updated and along with it we have updated the
configuration parameters.


---
#### **2019-08-23** [Add `deploy` Command](0029-add-deploy-command.md)
In order to provide a consistent user interface while making underlying changes,
we are replacing the `commcare-cloud <env> fab deploy` command with a more concise
`commcare-cloud <env> deploy` command.


---
#### **2019-08-23** [Removing support for Riak CS](0028-remove-riak.md)
We are removing support for deploying Riak CS clusters in commcare-cloud


---
#### **2019-08-23** [Fix python3 virutalenvs (Deprecated)](0027-fix-python3-virtualenv.md)
**Update (2019-11-27)**: This fix is no longer necessary as it has been superceded by changes
to the deploy script that make this change automatically if necessary.

This fixes a bug with how python3 virtualenvs were created by ansible. This fix needs to be applied to any
machine which has a python3 virtualenv that was created by commcare-cloud.

The fix is also safe to run on all CommCare hosts.


---
#### **2019-08-21** [Move remaining management commands explicitly](0026-move-remaining-management-commands.md)
This change requires editing `app-processes.yml` to add some of processes to the `management_comamnds`
section


---
#### **2019-08-20** [Rename management commands explicitly](0025-rename-management-commands.md)
This change requires editing `app-processes.yml` to rename some of the processes in the `management_comamnds`
section


---
#### **2019-07-17** [Define management commands explicitly](0024-define-management-commands.md)
This change requires changing app-processes.yml to include a list of management comamnds to run


---
#### **2018-07-18** [Upgrade to Python 3](0023-upgrade-to-python-3.md)
This change installs Python 3.6.8, builds a new virtualenv, and runs
CommCare HQ in Python 3.


---
#### **2019-05-13** [Install Pango](0022-install-pango.md)
This change installs pango and its dependencies for the weasyprint
library which has been added as a requirement to commcare-hq for
proper pdf printing of unicode fonts


---
#### **2019-02-26** [Fix to restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0021-fix-letsencrypt-restart-nginx.md)
Previously you had to manually restart nginx every time letsencrypt auto-renewed,
which was about every two months. We believed we had fixed this with
[Restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0010-letsencrypt-restart-nginx),
but there was an error in our setup at that time that made it not work as intended.


---
#### **2019-04-05** [Update RabbitMQ logging configuration](0020-update-rabbitmq-logging.md)
This change updates the RabbitMQ logging configuration to change the
log level from `info` to `warning`.


---
#### **2019-02-27** [Remove celery results backend from localsettings](0019-remove-celery-results-backend-from-localsettings.md)
Upgrading to celery 4.x requires removing the dependency on
django-celery, which means that its results backend will no
longer be available.  This removes the django-celery backend
as the default from localsettings, so the results backend can
be specified by commcare-hq settings instead.


---
#### **2019-02-26** [Split pgbouncer vars from postgresql vars](0018-split_pgbouncer_postgresql_vars.md)
This change extracts a new role from the existing postgresql role for installing
and configuring pgbouncer.

As a result of this change the `postgresql.yml` environment configuration file
needs to be changed to split out the postgresql vars from the pgbouncer vars.


---
#### **2019-02-27** [Only monitor specific RabbitMQ queues](0017-monitor-specific-rabbitmq-queues.md)
Datadog RabbitMQ monitoring restricts the number of queues it
can monitor to 200. To avoid hitting this limit on large
scale deployments we limit the queues being monitored to only
the primary queues.


---
#### **2019-02-22** [Update supervisor confs to invoke celery directly](0016-invoke-celery-directly.md)
Upgrading to celery 4.x requires removing the dependency on
django-celery, which means that the celery management command
becomes unavailable.  This prepares for that by invoking the
celery command directly.


---
#### **2019-02-22** [Separate celery datadog http check](0015-separate-celery-datadog-http-check.md)
This adds a specific http check for the celery check (serverup.txt?only=celery)
to datadog.
Environments that are not relying on datadog for monitoring can ignore this change.


---
#### **2019-02-11** [Add tag to datadog http checks](0014-add-tag-to-datadog-http-checks.md)
This change adds "check_type" tag to the http_check datadog integration.
This change applies only to envs using datadog for monitoring.


---
#### **2019-02-11** [Java upgrade for formplayer](0013-java-upgrade-for-formplayer.md)
Previously, Formplayer was running on Java 7.
This change updates us to Java 8 for formplayer.


---
#### **2019-02-01** [Generalize load case from fixture feature](0012-generalize-load-case-from-fixture.md)
Previously loading a case from a fixture required the fixture to be an attribute.
This change allows using non-attributes from the fixture.


---
#### **2019-01-16** [Fix encrypted temp directory permissions](0011-fix-encrypted-tmp-permissions.md)
This is a followup to [Added encrypted temporary directory](./0001-add-encrypted-tmp.md)
in which we introduced an encrypted directory for temp files.
In its original implementation, this file was owned by root,
and processes were unable to write to it.

This changes the directory to be owned by cchq, allowing our processes to write to the file.


---
#### **2019-01-02** [Restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0010-letsencrypt-restart-nginx.md)
**Update 2019-02-26**: There was a bug in this fix and it has been superceded by
[Fix to restart nginx after every letsencrypt cert auto-renewal](0021-fix-letsencrypt-restart-nginx).

Previously you had to manually restart nginx every time letsencrypt auto-renewed,
which was about every two months.


---
#### **2018-12-15** [Blob Metadata Migration - part 2](0009-blob-metadata-part-2.md)
Form submission attachment metadata is being consolidated in the blob
metadata table in SQL. This migration consists of a series of commands that
will consolidate the data in your environment.


---
#### **2018-09-24** [Blob Metadata Migration - part 1](0008-blob-metadata-part-1.md)
Blob metadata needs to be migrated from CouchDB to SQL. This migration
consists of a series of commands that will move the data in your environment.


---
#### **2018-11-26** [Reorganize pillows](0007-reorganize-pillows.md)
Pillows read changes from kafka and do various processing such as sending them to
elasticsearch, transforming into a UCR table row etc. A doc for same change is read
multiple times for each processor, since there are separte pillows for each processor.
This is inefficient, so we have combined multiple processors that apply for a
given document type (also called `KAFKA_TOPIC`) such as form/case/user under
one pillow. For e.g. A new single `case-pillow` pillow replaces
various old pillows that process case changes such as `CaseToElasticsearchPillow`,
`CaseSearchToElasticsearchPillow`, `ReportCaseToElasticsearchPillow`,
and `kafka-ucr-main` etc. 


---
#### **2018-11-20** [New Case Importer Celery Queue](0006-new-case-importer-celery-queue.md)
Importing cases is often a time-sensitive task, and prolonged backlogs are
very visible to users.  It will be useful to have a separate queue
specifically for case imports, to improve visibility into backups as well as
typical runtimes.  Additionally, this is a first step towards allocating
resources specifically for case imports, should that become necessary.


---
#### **2018-08-16** [Support multiple Kafka brokers](0005-support-multiple-kafak-brokers.md)
Large scale deployments of CommCare require scaling out Kafka brokers to support the high
traffic volume (as well as for high availability). Up until now CommCare has only
supported a single broker.


---
#### **2018-08-16** [Add queue for analytics tasks](0004-add-analytics-queue.md)
Tasks for analytics reporting have been separated into a new analytics celery queue.


---
#### **2018-07-25** [Update Supervisor](0003-update-supervisor.md)
Ubuntu 14.04 `apt-get install supervisor` installs supervisor 3.0b.
We occasionally have issues that could be related to supervisor,
such as processes not stopping correctly.
To rule it out as a possible cause,
we decided it was better to be on a later version of supervisor,
and one that's not in beta.


---
#### **2018-07-13** [Update supervisor service definitions](0002-supervisor-service-definitions.md)
There are several CommCare specific processes that are defined in supervisor
configuration files. This change decouples the process definitions from code.


---
#### **2018-06-11** [Added encrypted temporary directory](0001-add-encrypted-tmp.md)
Some of the CommCare processes make use of temporary files to store client data
(such as data exports) so in order to keep that data protected we have modified
the setup to use an encrypted temporary directory.


---
